at an early age I found out that alcohol
causes brain damage I was a child but I
was already a somewhat lanky child lanky
and sarcastic when I found that out and
in many ways that was the first step
that led me to becoming vegan and that
led me to really a very philosophical
perspective on the world and of being
extremely critical of the culture I
lived in the excuses that were so
commonly made in my culture and the
contradictions within the lives of all
the people around me if you live in a
country like Canada or Scotland to
different countries that have lived in
you're surrounded by people who are
living with brain damage caused by
alcohol and who are voluntarily
inflicting brain damage on themselves
through alcohol and you will also meet
many women who are mothers who have
inflicted brain damage on their own
children by drinking alcohol while
they're pregnant and years later I guess
when I was a teenager I remember reading
a scientific article talking about the
fact that in Canada and countries like
Canada brain damage caused the infant's
through alcohol was a much more serious
and much more widespread problem than
hiv/aids but at that time hiv/aids was
the focus of tremendous public education
efforts including special programs
having to do with the small number of
infants being born with serious health
problems or with AIDS itself because
their mothers were infected by the
disease and this article was saying yes
in some countries hiv/aids is a bigger
problem
but actually perhaps a country like
Canada he's engaging in a sort of self
deception because hiv/aids is actually
easier for us to talk about easier for
us to reflect on easier for us to
moralize about then the role that
alcohol has in so many of our lives now
I myself drink zero alcohol I made that
decision at a pretty early age that I
was not gonna drink alcohol but I did
have a couple of years of drinking in my
teenage years but that doesn't change
the fact that I live in a society where
I'm surrounded by people for whom
alcohol shapes their lives
profoundly
alcohol dominates the social time the
free time the the concept of relaxation
itself the concept of leisure the
concept of work what motivates people
what rewards people the way people
interact the way people make friends
meet their lovers learn to respect each
other learn to love each other learn to
reconcile their differences all of those
things in Western culture are shaped by
alcohol use and all the while alcohol
use very literally causes brain damage
it causes brain damage to the adults who
drink it and obviously there's this
other issue haunting our society of how
many millions of people have impaired
brain function every day of their lives
to the rest of their lives because their
mothers drank alcohol before they were
born while they were in the womb
I have watched and listened to some
documentaries that were brutally honest
about those facts where you had people
who themselves had brain impairment
because of their mother's drinking
alcohol reflecting on the ways in which
they changed their lives
it doesn't just you know reduce your
wattage like a dimming the intensity of
a light bulb it doesn't just in some
simple mathematical sense make you less
intelligent of course it impacts your
emotional character it impacts what kind
of person you are in a way that's
difficult for us to describe difficult
for us to reflect on difficult for us to
admit to ourselves and again it's hard
to deal with on a one-to-one basis of
perhaps you and your own brother and
it's much more difficult to deal with
when you scale it up socially to think
about millions of people in the effect
it has or if you think about people who
are in positions of tremendous political
power people like the president United
States Prime Minister of England who
made themselves have seriously impaired
brain function due to these common
culturally accepted factors the things
so many of us make excuses for so many
of us say we should compromise about so
many of us say we should just be
moderate and reasonable about like
alcohol causing brain damage
now say for me in my personal
progression towards becoming a vegan
finding out that alcohol caused brain
damage and then reflecting on the
excuses that were so commonly made for
it being normal and natural and
necessary that has striking parallels to
finding out that meat is not only
unnecessary for human health but is
actually damaging to human health and
then seeing the excuses that people
around me made that meat was meat
consumption was normal and natural and
necessary and that we had to accept this
this had always been part of our culture
the soul is part of our civilization and
again meat like alcohol it has these you
know tremendous cultural values ascribed
to it
meat you know it's like to celebration
to know concepts of generosity it's
linked to all kinds of religious rituals
even if you think something like
Thanksgiving or Christmas are not that
religious the ceremonial eating and
sharing of me these are powerful tokens
in Western culture Western civilization
and for me there's a very real parallel
and there's a there's a parallel with
the powerful role of scientific
knowledge in contrast to cultural
assumptions when you look at those two
now
culture masks the significance of
science in our lives in many ways and
one of them is simply the use of
language itself if you think about the
word heart attack or the word stroke the
medical use of stroke this seems to
suggest a single event that happens in a
short span of time at one moment in your
life and either it happens or it doesn't
it's very common to read newspaper
articles or to talk to ordinary people
even to talk to medical doctors who
discuss heart attack and stroke as if
there were roll of the dice as if you
can go through your life eating a diet
that includes bacon and cheese and so
long as the plaques develop in your
arteries in a way that doesn't result in
heart attack or stroke
you're lucky you're fine there's no harm
done
the idea that a heart attack is just
something that happens at one moment
it's built into the very word and
content of a heart attack the concept of
a stroke it actually the reason why we
use the word stroke comes from the
phrase a stroke of the hand of God and
if you go back 500 years or so that was
actually the long form of this at that
time mysterious medical condition of
people having a stroke that this was an
act of God that suddenly took away your
ability to think or use your limbs
properly etc the symptoms of strokes are
various not everyone has the same
symptoms but it's a dramatic and
horrifying medical condition even on a
more simple level if someone asks you if
a child ask you what is a stroke you
have to say it's a type of seizure and
if you look into why the word seizure is
used this comes from a seized to grab
something this again ultimately the
ancient idea is of a spirit seizing you
of you being possessed by a demon or a
spirit and again the idea that this
isn't that happens in one moment it's
actually more horrifying in a more
subtle and profound way to realize that
these problems like atherosclerosis
atherosclerosis a word that even I've
heard real medical specialists
mispronounce atherosclerosis it's
difficult to say it's difficult to
understand what it is the reality is
that the underlying conditions that
really unify stroke and heart attacks
such as atherosclerosis which is
basically having plaques obstructions
build up in your bloodstream in the
circulation your blood this is a problem
all the time and for the vast majority
of people in a country like the United
States of America it's not just a
problem your old age it's not just a
problem when you have a heart attack
it's a problem from when you were 6
years old until the day you die
because 6 year olds in America eat bacon
eat cheese have a diet that causes
atherosclerosis that causes so called
hardening of the arteries again is that
description really useful that causes
these plaques to build up that obstruct
the flow of blood through your whole
body
now what's much more horrifying to
realize again heart attack describes
something just centered in your heart
stroke it's even more nebulous and
absurd where is a stroke what is a
stroke what does this mean inside your
body the reality is that atherosclerosis
is something that happens everywhere
that you have blood circulating it
impacts your toes and it impacts your
eyes and above all else it impacts the
circulation of blood inside your own
brain in a subtle and profound and
pernicious sense the plaque in your
bloodstream the accumulation of
cholesterol related blockages throughout
your body impacts who you are how you
think how you feel in a way that's much
it's just as invidious it's just as
scary and disturbing to think about as
having to reflect on whether or not you
are a different person today because
your mother drank alcohol while she was
pregnant with you
or perhaps your mother was addicted to
cocaine during her pregnancy I have men
spoke to one man who had to live with
that he knew for a fact that his mother
was addicted to crack cocaine during the
pregnancy and he did have symptoms he
did have health problems as a result
that I had met many more people for him
alcohol
impacted their lives in those ways and
one member of my own family
was severely [ __ ] severely mentally
disabled for his whole life
because of choices that his mother made
during the pregnancy so these things do
touch us all they touch me in my life
but it's also scary to reflect the
extent to which non diagnosed conditions
all around us are shaping who we are how
we live how we think and how we feel in
a profound and simple sense what we call
Alzheimer's disease is atherosclerosis
Alzheimer's disease is an extreme
condition where the blockages the
impaired circulation of blood within
your brain is having severe symptoms but
long before you reach the point where
you would be diagnosed for that
condition or where any kind of
diagnostic medical tests be performed on
your brain or on your arteries the
blockages the hardening of plaque the
effects of cholesterol in the human diet
will be changing the way how you think
the way you feel the way you perceive
the world this is not a spectrum
condition but in the same sense in which
you may never have a heart attack you
may eat bacon and cheese every day live
to be a hundred and then be hit by a bus
however even if you never have a heart
attack and you never have a stroke the
reality of how the blood is circulated
through your heart through your muscles
through your body will be impacted 24
hours a day seven days a week at all
times by the blockages in your
bloodstream which is basically what we
call atherosclerosis and the connection
between cholesterol and atherosclerosis
is not debatable it's now one of the
simplest most universal medical facts
the connection between atherosclerosis
and will be called Alzheimer's disease
was already documented in the first
article by dr. Alzheimer on this subject
describing what it was in the human
brain okay the point is even if you
never reach that point of having a
diagnosed condition such as Alzheimer's
who you are how you think and how your
brain operates is being impaired by the
cholesterol in your diet and again when
you scale that up when you think about
it on the scale of millions of people
around you that's when it really becomes
terrifying in the same sense that the
social impacts of drinking alcohol
become truly terrifying I did research
not too long ago less than two years ago
now about the period of World War one
history of Russia Asia during the
presidency of Woodrow Wilson
when I was looking in detail at the
decisions Woodrow Wilson made in
relation to a certain set of political
problems I didn't just think that his
decisions were inept or incompetent I
actually thought that this man was
insane and I was reading you know
directs u.s. diplomatic corps wires
communications in the United States and
Japan at that time communication to the
United States in Russia at that time of
course had been recorded for for history
and then I start to look into the health
of Woodrow Wilson I'll provide a link to
one website below this video it's
actually not unreasonable to say that
Woodrow Wilson was in a technical sense
insane and Woodrow Wilson's health
conditions the deterioration of his
brain of his ability to think coherently
or of course link to stroke and the
basis for the strokes plural that he
suffered is doubtless atherosclerosis
now there's another stereotype here that
Woodrow Wilson is important and
challenging throughout his whole career
Woodrow Wilson he was never a fat man he
was rail-thin
he was strikingly thin he had gaunt
sheets if you look at most photographs
of him don't look at the paintings that
are flattering he is much leaner than
most male models he was a very lean man
but nevertheless the meat and dairy
products in his diet impaired his
ability to think they caused him to have
paralysis in some of his limbs at
different times at one point his life he
went blind in one eye when the blood in
your brain does not circulate properly
it results in these kinds of very real
impairments and how you think how you
feel your ability to use your limbs and
so on and Woodrow Wilson is a remarkable
example of that however he's an extreme
example the question what we'll never
know
is when you look at someone like Donald
Trump right now in 2016 Donald Trump
could become the next president in
States Donald Trump has cholesterol
problems Donald Trump takes medicine to
lower his cholesterol levels medicines
called statins
and he believes he has his cholesterol
under control if you're vegan you're in
the tiny minority people who truly have
your cholesterol under control because
you have zero dietary cholesterol your
body generates its own cholesterol
Donald Trump has never had these extreme
symptoms that Woodrow Wilson has to my
knowledge general Trump has never gone
blind in one eye he's never had his hand
paralyzed
he's never had the obvious signs of
stroke and of these atherosclerosis
related health problems circulation of
blood in his body and brain however he
certainly has a very well-documented
history of aberrant behavior of
incoherent and arguably somewhat insane
thinking and speech and conduct in the
last 15 years if you were to look back
on how Donald Trump's behavior has
changed I was character has changed
because that's he's been on television
since the 1980s almost continuously his
mannerisms has changed in a very real
sense who he is has changed one of the
remarkable things about Donald Trump
could have I believe him on this Donald
Trump says that in his whole life
he's never used alcohol he's never used
drugs of any kind he's been clean and
sober and he has various emotional and
intellectual reasons for why he did that
so we may be looking at an instance in
Donald Trump where you see the
deterioration of his faculties the
deterioration of his thinking and the
basis for that is perhaps not even an
extravagant diet perhaps simply a
standard American diet where your levels
of cholesterol and your body's long term
struggle with atherosclerosis is
impairing and degrading your brain
function I think our very idea of what
it means to grow old of what kind of
sanity mental alacrity sharpness is
normal for someone at 50 years of age
how much learning you're capable of at
thirty years of age and a profound sense
our idea of what it is to be an adult in
this culture has been shaped by our
broad-based use of alcohol cigarettes
cholesterol on her diet and the
degradation of the human capacity to
think and feel the reshaping of who we
are through what we put in our bodies
and the reality is that that very basic
insight or that very basic concern of
just expressed to you was not possible
just a few generations ago it was only
thought made possible through the
progress of science in the last few
decades
and still today many people will respond
with shock and horror if you raise these
issues the same way that during my
childhood people would be shocked and
horrified if you talked openly about
women drinking alcohol during pregnancy
and still to this day I meet women who
drink alcohol during pregnancy when my
own wife was pregnant I'm not divorced
but when my own wife was pregnant we met
and talked to medical doctors and other
people and the medical doctors would
also complain that they still had
patients coming in who were drinking
alcohol all the way through their
pregnancy who were ignoring it is a real
ongoing problem in Canada in France in
Scotland and it impacts humans as
individuals and ultimately it shapes and
reshapes their whole society but the
perspective I've shared with you in this
video in many ways would have been
impossible just a few generations ago it
would have been laughed at one
generation culture my childhood but the
increasing availability of scientific
research the increasing ease with which
we can read at least in English on the
Internet
real peer-reviewed sources in which we
can confirm our concerns about these
things that will now inevitably change
the world again it was very difficult
for people to admit at one time you look
at the history of cocaine that cocaine
was poison there was a time when people
thought cocaine was a miracle cure it
was very hard for us in Western
civilization to admit that tobacco was
poisoned you have to go way back
centuries and centuries ago but there
was a time when we believed nicotine
when we believed tobacco was a miracle
cure for all kinds of things including
deafness they still put tobacco in
people's ears and so on was ridiculous
many of these drugs and people first
encountered them there was reckless
optimism and you know the
leave that meat and alcohol are so much
a part of the meaning of our lives of
what we do with their leisure time of
who we are as people that's become a
crutch that all of Western civilization
hobbles along on and I'm looking forward
to the day when we stop making excuses
but the crutches down and when we truly
get to see what we're capable of as
adults